---
layout: post
tagline: "Supporting tagline"
tags : [comportex]
---
{% include JB/setup %}


Greetings, imaginary readers!

Like many people, it seems, my passion for artificial intelligence has
been rekindled recently. Douglas Hofstadter and Jeff Hawkins were the
main rekindlers for me. Now I've set off exploring.

I'm hoping to push the boundaries of artificial intelligence, creating
something that can learn, explore, generalise, theorise, and surprise.
Why? Well, it seems self-evident that the tools we build should have
some basic intelligence. Some software and games can give the
*illusion* of intelligence, but they are mindless zombies, unable to
deal with even slightly new situations, and will happily bang their
heads against a brick wall until, um, they're taken out by a zombie
hunter, or something. Computational intelligence has the potential to
make technology do what we want, with **robust adaptability**. The
cost is vastly more computation and memory requirements. Not to
mention the difficulty of developing all this. But smart people are
working on it. And it should be fun.

I'm convinced that Jeff Hawkins' [Hierarchical Temporal
Memory](https://numenta.com/technology/) (HTM) is the proper basis for
such computational intelligence. Of course, HTM is a general theory
and has not yet been worked out at a level of detail applicable to
most interesting problems. My strategy will be to focus on examples.
To attack specific problems as a way to inspire development of the
theory. I'll design simulations with opportunities for learning and
watch what goes wrong.

HTM is based on a memory system, arranged in a hierarchy of increasing
abstraction, where the memory is simultaneously a predictive function.
So it can recognise things, or situations or whatever, and infer what
is happening and what will happen next. There are no emotions, no
instinctive drives. Just recognition, generalisation, analogy. This is
not scary. Zombies are scary. Intelligence, in and of itself, is not.
Of course every technology will be put to nasty uses, but I think it's
hard to argue that more intelligence is a bad thing, in any domain.
